I want to lead here by talking a little
bit about my credentials to bring this
up with you because quite honestly you
really really should not listen to any
old person with an opinion about kovat
19 so I've been working in global health
for about 20 years and my specific
technical specialty is in health systems
and what happens when Health Systems
experience severe shocks I've also
worked in global health journalism I've
written about global health and
biosecurity for newspapers and web
outlets and I published a book a few
years back about the major global health
threats facing us as a planet I have
supported and led epidemiology efforts
that range from evaluating Ebola
treatment centers to looking at
transmission of tuberculosis and health
facilities and doing avian influenza
preparedness I have a master's degree in
international health I'm not a physician
I'm not a nurse my specialty isn't
patient care or taking care of
individual people my specialty is
looking at populations and health
systems what happens when diseases move
on the large level if we're ranking
sources of global health expertise on a
scale of one to ten one is some random
person ranting on Facebook and 10 is the
World Health Organization I'd say you
can probably put me at like a seven or
an eight so keep that in mind as I talk
to you I'll start with the basics here
because I think that's gotten lost in
some of the media noise around kovat 19
so Kovan 19 is a corona virus and corona
viruses are a specific subset of virus
and they have some unique characteristic
as viruses they use RNA instead of DNA
as their genetic material
and they're covered in spikes on the
surface of the virus and they use those
spikes to invade cells those spikes are
the corona in corona virus kovat 19 is
known as a novel coronavirus because
until december we'd only heard of six
corona viruses Kovan 19 is the seventh
it's new to us it just had its gene
sequencing it just got its name that's
why it's novel if you remember SARS
severe acute respiratory syndrome or
MERS Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome
those were corona viruses and they're
both called respiratory syndrome because
that's what corona viruses do they go
for your lungs they don't make you puke
they don't make you bleed from the
eyeballs they don't make you a
hemorrhage they head for your lungs
Hoeven 19 is no different it causes a
range of respiratory symptoms that go
from stuff like a dry cough and a fever
all the way out to fatal viral pneumonia
and that range of symptoms is one of the
reasons it's actually been so hard to
track this outbreak plenty of people get
Kovan 19 but so gently their symptoms
are so mild that they don't even go to a
health care provider they don't register
in the system children in particular
have it very easy with kovat 19 which is
something we should all be grateful for
Karuna viruses are zoonotic which means
that they transmit from animals to
people some corona viruses like kovat 19
also transmit person to person
the person-to-person ones travel faster
and travel farther
just like kovat 19z notic illnesses are
really hard to get rid of because they
have an animal reservoir
one example is avian influenza where we
can abolish it in farmed animals in
turkeys in ducks but it keeps coming
back every year because it's brought to
us by wild birds you don't hear a lot
about it because even influenza doesn't
transmit person-to-person but we have
outbreaks in poultry farms every year
all over the world
Kovan 19 most likely skipped from
animals into people at a wild animal
market in Wuhan China now for the less
basic parts this is not the last major
outbreak we're ever going to see there's
going to be more outbreaks and there's
going to be more epidemics that's not a
maybe that's a given and it's a result
of the way that we as human beings are
interacting with our planet human
choices are driving us into a position
where we're going to see more outbreaks
part of that is the climate change and
the way I'm warming climate makes the
world more hospitable to viruses and
bacteria but it's also about the way
we're pushing into the last wild spaces
on our planet when we burn and plow the
Amazon rainforest so that we can have
cheap land for ranching when the last of
the African bush gets converted to farms
when wild animals in China are hunted to
extinction human beings come into
contact with wildlife populations that
they've never come into contact with
before and those populations have new
kinds of diseases bacteria viruses stuff
we're not ready for bats in particular
have a knack for hosting illnesses that
can infect people but they're not the
only animals that do it so as long as we
keep making our remote places less
remote the outbreaks are going to keep
coming we can't stop the outbreaks with
quarantine or travel restrictions that's
everybody's first impulse let's stop the
people from moving let's stop this
outbreak from happening but the fact is
it's really hard to get a good at
quarantine in place it's really hard to
set up travel restrictions even the
countries that have made serious
investments in public health like the
u.s. and South Korea can't get that kind
of restriction in place fast enough to
actually stop an outbreak instantly
there's logistical reasons for that and
there's medical reasons if you look at
kovat 19 right now it seems like it
could have a period where you're
infected
and show no symptoms that's as long as
24 days so people are walking around
with this virus showing no signs they're
not going to get quarantined nobody
knows they need quarantine e there's
also some real costs to quarantine and
two travel restrictions humans are
social animals and they resist when you
try to hold them into place and when you
try to separate them we saw in the Ebola
outbreak that as soon as you put a
quarantine in place people start trying
to evade it individual patients if they
know there's a strict quarantine
protocol may not go for health care
because they're afraid of the medical
system or they can't afford care and
they don't want to be separated from
their family and friends politicians
government officials when they know that
they're going to get quarantined if they
talk about outbreaks and cases may
conceal real information for fear of
triggering a quarantine protocol and of
course these kinds of evasions and
dishonesty are exactly what it makes it
so difficult to track a disease outbreak
we can get better at quarantines and
travel restrictions and we should but
they're not our only option and they're
not our best option for dealing with
these situations the real way for the
long haul to make outbreaks less serious
is to build the global health system to
support core healthcare functions in
every country in the world so that all
countries even poor ones are able to
rapidly identify and treat new
infectious diseases as they emerge
China's taken a lot of criticism for its
response to kovat 19 but the fact is
what if kovat 19 had emerged in Chad
which has three and a half doctors for
every hundred thousand people what if it
emerged in the Democratic Republic of
Congo which just released its last Ebola
patient from treatment
the truth is countries like this don't
have the resources to respond to an
infectious disease not to treat people
and not to report on it fast enough to
help the rest of the world I led
evaluation of the bullet treatment
centers in Sierra Leone and the fact is
the local doctors in Sierra Leone
identified the Ebola crisis very quickly
first is a dangerous contagious
hemorrhagic virus and then as a bola
itself but having identified it they
didn't have the resources to respond
they didn't have enough doctors they
didn't have enough hospital beds and
they didn't have enough information
about how to treat Ebola or how to
implement infection control 11 doctors
died in Sierra Leone of Ebola the
country only had 120 when the crisis
started by way of contrast Dallas Baylor
Medical Center has more than a thousand
physicians on staff these are the kinds
of inequities that kill people first
they killed the poor people when the
outbreaks start and then they kill
people all over the world when the
outbreaks spread if we really want to
slow down these outbreaks and minimize
their impact we need to make sure that
every country in the world has the
capacity to identify new diseases treat
them and report about them so they can
share information covin 19 is going to
be a huge burden on health systems kovat
19 has also revealed some real
weaknesses in our global health supply
chains just in time or during lean
systems are great when things are going
well but in a time of crisis what it
means is we don't have any reserves if a
hospital or a country runs out of face
masks or personal protective equipment
there's no big warehouse full of boxes
that we can go to to get more you have
to order more from the supplier you have
to wait for them to produce it and you
have to wait for them to ship it
generally from China that's a time lag
at a time when it's most important and
move quickly if we'd been perfectly
prepared for Cova 19 China would have
identified the outbreak faster they
would have been ready to provide care to
infected people without having to build
new buildings they would have shared
honest information with citizens so that
we didn't see these crazy rumors
spreading on social media in China
and they would have shared information
with global health authorities so that
they could start reporting to national
health systems and getting ready for
when the virus spread national health
systems would then have been able to
stockpile the protective equipment they
needed and trained healthcare providers
on treatment and infection control
we'd have science-based protocols for
what to do when things happen like
cruise ships have infected patients and
we'd have real information going out to
people everywhere so we wouldn't see
embarrassing shameful incidents of
xenophobia like asian-looking people
getting attract attacked on the street
in Philadelphia but even with all that
in place we would still have outbreaks
the choices were making about how we
occupy this planet make that inevitable
as far as we have an expert consensus on
kovat 19:00 it's this here in the US and
globally it's going to get worse before
it gets better
we're seeing cases of human transmission
that aren't firm returning travel that
are just happening in the community and
we're seeing people infected with kovat
19 when we don't even know where the
infection came from those are signs of
an outbreak that's getting worse not an
outbreak that's under control it's
depressing but it's not surprising
global health experts when they talk
about the scenario of new viruses this
is one of the scenarios that they look
at we all hoped we'd get off easy but
when experts talk about viral planning
this is the kind of situation and the
way they expect the virus to move I want
to close here with some personal advice
wash your hands wash your hands a lot I
know you already wash your hands a lot
because you're not disgusting but wash
your hands even more set up cues and
routines in your life to get you to wash
your hands wash your hands every time
you enter and leave a building wash your
hands when you go into a meeting and
when you come out of a meeting get
rituals they are based around
hand-washing sanitize your phone you
touch that phone with your dirty
unwashed hands
all the time I know you take it into the
bathroom with you
so sanitize your phone and consider not
using it as often in public maybe
tick-tock and Instagram could be home
things only don't touch your face don't
rub your eyes don't bite your
fingernails don't wipe your nose in the
back of your hand
I mean don't do that anyway because
gross don't worry face masks face masks
are for sick people and health care
providers if you're sick your face mask
holds in all your coughing and sneezing
and protects the people around you and
if you're a health care provider your
face mask is one tool in a set of tools
called personal protective equipment
that you're trained to use so that you
can give patient care and not get sick
yourself if you're a regular healthy
person wearing a face mask it's just
making your face sweaty leave the face
masks in stores for the doctors and the
nurses and the sick people if you think
you have symptoms of Cova 19 stay home
call your doctor for advice if you're
diagnosed with kovat 19 remember it's
generally very mild and if you're a
smoker right now it's the best possible
time to quit smoking I mean if you're a
smoker right now is always the best
possible time to quit smoking but if
you're a smoker and you're worried about
kovat 19 I guarantee that quitting is
absolutely the best thing you can do to
protect yourself from the worst impacts
of kovat 19 Kovan 19 is scary stuff at a
time when pretty much all of our news
feels like scary stuff and there's a lot
of bad but appealing options for dealing
with it panic xenophobia Agra phobia
authoritarianism oversimplified lies
that make us think that hate and fury
and loneliness are the solution to
outbreaks but they're not they just make
us less prepared there's also a boring
but useful set of options that we can
use in response to outbreaks things like
improving health care
here and everywhere investing in health
infrastructure and disease surveillance
so that we know when the new diseases
come building health systems all over
the world looking at strengthening our
supply chain so they're ready for
emergencies and better education so
we're capable of talking about disease
outbreaks and the mathematics of risk
without just blind panic we need to be
guided by equity here because in this
situation like so many equity is
actually in our own self-interest so
thank you so much for listening to me
today and can I be the first one to tell
you wash your hands when you leave the
theater
[Applause]
[Music]